Add policy on using caret (^) or tilde (~) with dependencies (#290)
expressjs/discussions: docs/adr/002-policy-on-using-caret-with-dependencies.md

- Requires discipline in maintaining lockfiles to ensure stability for end users.

**Why is this decision the best option?**  
This decision strikes a balance between reducing maintenance effort and managing risk. It allows Express to leverage the benefits of semver for our own dependencies while maintaining control over external libraries that could introduce breaking changes.

## Consequences

**Positive Impact**:  
- Fewer manual updates required for internally managed dependencies.
- Users benefit from improvements and fixes in internal packages more quickly.

**Negative Impact**:  
- Potential risk of regressions if an internal dependency introduces a breaking change in a minor update.
- Users relying on strict version control may need to adjust their expectations when using our own dependencies.

**Mitigations**:
- Strong test coverage and CI checks will help catch potential issues early.
- Clear communication in documentation and release notes to inform users of the updated dependency policy.
- Ensure that we are following strict semver when releasing our own libraries.

## Implementation

> - **Phase 1**: Update `package.json` files across all packages to apply `^` for all dependencies.

Reviewer: Only in those packages where Node.js support allows it. *compression* cannot at the moment, and this is also the case for several packages that still support Node.js 0.8.

Author: true... I include a reference in https://github.com/expressjs/discussions/blob/adr/dependecies/docs/adr/002-policy-on-using-caret-with-dependencies.md?plain=1#L33, but we can also include one explicit here. WDYT?

Reviewer: Yep, something more explicit here would be great, since not all packages are in the process of leaving the old Node yet.

Reviewer 2: I’m not sure why it can’t? node 0.8 can still upgrade to an npm that supports carets

Author: fair point @ljharb, but that will require for the end user to use a never npm version (not the default one) so it adds an additional step for them in order to use the library. But we can easily assume that users that keep running Node@0.8 in 2025 are use to workarounds :smile:

Reviewer: Yep, although it would complicate our CI a bit, which I already tried to do for compression, but Wes opposed it.

Reviewer 2: nvm install-latest-npm works perfectly :-p

Reviewer: I tried it, and it actually didn’t work. I don’t remember why, but I can look into it later.

Reviewer: Now I remember, it was the `engines` field that npm uses, which doesn’t allow it to be used in an older version of Node.

Reviewer 2: certainly `npm install -g npm` will fail for that and many other reasons; that's why nvm has its own custom logic for installing the latest npm _that works_.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- **Phase 1**: Update `package.json` files across all packages to apply `^` for all dependencies which support greater than node@0.10.0.
```

## Context
Historically, the Express project has avoided using the caret (`^`) in the `package.json` files for its own dependencies. This proposal aims to review whether this practice should continue or if adjustments are needed.

**Why do we need this decision?**  
Clarifying the policy on using caret (`^`) helps to ensure consistency across the Express ecosystem, reduce unnecessary maintenance, and prevent unexpected dependency updates. It also addresses concerns about the balance between keeping dependencies up-to-date and avoiding regressions.

**What problem does it solve or avoid?**  
This decision aims to reduce the maintenance burden of frequently updating pinned dependencies.

**Are there any existing issues/discussions/pull requests related to this?**  
- [Discussion: Using caret (^) with our own dependencies #279](https://github.com/expressjs/discussions/issues/279)
- [expressjs/express#6017 (comment)](https://github.com/expressjs/express/issues/6017)

## Decision
We will adopt a policy where the caret (`^`) symbol is used for dependencies all dependencies.

**What will be done?**  
- Update the `package.json` files to use `^` for all dependencies (both prod and dev).

> **Note on `^` vs. `~`:**  
> - `^` allows updates to the most recent minor or patch version, offering greater flexibility and reducing the need for frequent manual updates. For example, `^1.2.3` will accept updates to `1.3.0`, `1.4.0`, but not `2.0.0`.
> - `~` is more conservative, only allowing updates to patch versions. For example, `~1.2.3` will accept updates to `1.2.4`, `1.2.5`, but not `1.3.0`.
> - For our own dependencies that adhere strictly to semver, `^` is preferred over `~`, while for third-party libraries, a stricter versioning strategy is maintained to prevent unexpected regressions.

Author: ```suggestion
**Note on `^` vs. `~`:**  
- `^` allows updates to the most recent minor or patch version, offering greater flexibility and reducing the need for frequent manual updates. For example, `^1.2.3` will accept updates to `1.3.0`, `1.4.0`, but not `2.0.0`.
- `~` is more conservative, only allowing updates to patch versions. For example, `~1.2.3` will accept updates to `1.2.4`, `1.2.5`, but not `1.3.0`. Some Node.js legacy versions only support this, like Node@0.8.
```

> **What will not be done?**  
> - We will not use `^` or `~` for external dependencies that are not maintained by the Express organization, as they could introduce unexpected changes.
> - We won't force to use `^` or `~` for own dependencies if there is a reason to use a pinned version and it is properly documented.

Author: ```suggestion
**What will not be done?**  
- We won't force to use `^` or `~` for any dependency if there is a reason to use a pinned version and it is properly documented.
```

## Rationale

**Alternatives Considered:**

> - **Alternative 1:** Use `^` for all dependencies, including third-party libraries.  
> - **Reason for rejection:** This could increase the risk of unintended regressions and security issues from third-party updates.
> - **Alternative 2:** Continue pinning all dependencies, including internal ones, to specific versions.  
> - **Reason for rejection:** This approach requires frequent updates and increases the maintenance burden, as each minor or patch update requires a new release.

Author: ```suggestion
- **Alternative:** Continue pinning all dependencies, including internal ones, to specific versions.  
- **Reason for rejection:** This approach requires frequent updates and increases the maintenance burden, as each minor or patch update requires a new release.
```

# ADR 002: Policy on Using Caret (`^`) or tilde (`~`) with Dependencies in `package.json`

## Status
Proposed

## Submitters
- Ulises Gascón (@UlisesGascon)

## Decision Owners
- Express TC (@expressjs/express-tc)

## Context

> Historically, the Express project has avoided using the caret (`^`) in the `package.json` files for its own dependencies. This decision aims to review whether this practice should continue or if adjustments are needed.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Historically, the Express project has avoided using the caret (`^`) in the `package.json` files for its own dependencies. This proposal aims to review whether this practice should continue or if adjustments are needed.
```

**Why do we need this decision?**  
Clarifying the policy on using caret (`^`) helps to ensure consistency across the Express ecosystem, reduce unnecessary maintenance, and prevent unexpected dependency updates. It also addresses concerns about the balance between keeping dependencies up-to-date and avoiding regressions.

**What problem does it solve or avoid?**  

> This decision aims to avoid unexpected updates and regressions from external dependencies while reducing the maintenance burden of frequently updating pinned dependencies.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
This decision aims to reduce the maintenance burden of frequently updating pinned dependencies.
```

**Are there any existing issues/discussions/pull requests related to this?**  
- [Discussion: Using caret (^) with our own dependencies #279](https://github.com/expressjs/discussions/issues/279)
- [expressjs/express#6017 (comment)](https://github.com/expressjs/express/issues/6017)

## Decision

> We will adopt a policy where the caret (`^`) symbol is used for dependencies owned within the Express ecosystem (e.g., `body-parser` for Express), but continue to avoid using it for third-party dependencies that we do not maintain.

Reviewer 2: why not also for third party deps? most maintainers don't backport fixes to previous minors.

Reviewer 4: Agreed, we should always use `^` and use dependencies/authors we trust, no need to fight the ecosystem.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
We will adopt a policy where the caret (`^`) symbol is used for all dependencies.
```

Reviewer: it’s going to be all the dependencies, right?

Reviewer 2: As long as the dep follows semver, yes - otherwise it might use `~` or `=` - but those would be one-off cases.

**What will be done?**  

> - Update the `package.json` files to use `^` for our own dependencies.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- Update the `package.json` files to use `^` for all dependencies (both prod and dev).
```

> - Continue using fixed versions (no caret or tilde) for external dependencies to minimize risks of unintended updates.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion

```

**Note on `^` vs. `~`:**  
- `^` allows updates to the most recent minor or patch version, offering greater flexibility and reducing the need for frequent manual updates. For example, `^1.2.3` will accept updates to `1.3.0`, `1.4.0`, but not `2.0.0`.
- `~` is more conservative, only allowing updates to patch versions. For example, `~1.2.3` will accept updates to `1.2.4`, `1.2.5`, but not `1.3.0`.
- For our own dependencies that adhere strictly to semver, `^` is preferred over `~`, while for third-party libraries, a stricter versioning strategy is maintained to prevent unexpected regressions.

**What will not be done?**  

> - We will not use `^` or `~` for external dependencies that are not maintained by the Express organization, as they could introduce unexpected changes.

Reviewer 4: I'm not sure there's any reason to use `~` either, I think we would have used it instead of `^` due to supported NPM versions.

Reviewer 2: That's indeed the only reason express used `~`, because v4 came out at a time when not every npm version supported `^`.

Reviewer 3: Yep, I think we can remove this whole line.

> - We won't force to use `^` or `~` for own dependencies if there is a reason to use a fix version and it is properly documented.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
- We won't force to use `^` or `~` for own dependencies if there is a reason to use a pinned version and it is properly documented.
```

## Rationale

**Alternatives Considered:**
- **Alternative 1:** Use `^` for all dependencies, including third-party libraries.  

> - **Reason for rejection:** This could increase the risk of unintended regressions and security issues from third-party updates.

Reviewer 2: imo this risk is lower than the risk of dependency vulnerability/regression *fixes* from *not* being available to downstream users.

- Requires discipline in maintaining lockfiles to ensure stability for end users.

**Why is this decision the best option?**  
This decision strikes a balance between reducing maintenance effort and managing risk. It allows Express to leverage the benefits of semver for our own dependencies while maintaining control over external libraries that could introduce breaking changes.

## Consequences

**Positive Impact**:  
- Fewer manual updates required for internally managed dependencies.
- Users benefit from improvements and fixes in internal packages more quickly.

**Negative Impact**:  
- Potential risk of regressions if an internal dependency introduces a breaking change in a minor update.
- Users relying on strict version control may need to adjust their expectations when using our own dependencies.

**Mitigations**:
- Strong test coverage and CI checks will help catch potential issues early.
- Clear communication in documentation and release notes to inform users of the updated dependency policy.
- Ensure that we are following strict semver when releasing our own libraries.

## Implementation

> - **Phase 1**: Update `package.json` files across all packages to apply `^` for our own dependencies.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- **Phase 1**: Update `package.json` files across all packages to apply `^` for all dependencies.
```
